========================================================
author: 
date: 
autosize: true
incremental: true
width: 1920
height: 1080

========================================================
<h2> Main ideas </h2>

* We can use the F-test in many cases to study the significance of explanatory variables, combinations of explanatory variables and particular values for the effect on the response...
 * <h3>if the null hypothesis is repsented as an "embedded sub-model"</b>.
 * Examples are:
 <ol>
    <li> excluding some number of explanatory variables from the large model;</li>
    <li> combining several explanatory variables from the large model into a single explanatory variable;</li>
    <li> specifying a particular value for the effect of some explanatory variable on the response.</li>
 </ol>
 * For special cases:
  <ol>
    <li> excluding a <b>single</b> explanatory variable;</li>
    <li>. specifying a particular value for the effect on the response;</li>
  </ol>
  
   * this is equivalent to a t-test with the appropriate number of degrees of freedom (n-p).
   
========================================================

<h1> Confidence intervals </h1>

* We return now to the idea of confidence intervals as an alternative (and dual) idea to hypothesis testing.

* Recall (under our Gaussian assumptions) 
 
 $$\boldsymbol{\epsilon} \sim N\left(\boldsymbol{0}, \sigma^2 \mathbf{I} \right)$$

* that

  $$\hat{\boldsymbol{\beta}} \sim N\left(\boldsymbol{\beta}, \left(\mathbf{X}^\mathrm{T}\mathbf{X}\right)^{-1} \sigma \right)$$
  
* In this context, we have an unbiased, sample based estimate for the true mean $\boldsymbol{\beta}$, with a known variance and $n-p$ degrees of freedom.

* <b> Q:</b> what is the preceding setup suggesting?

* <b>A:</b> we should create an interval centered at $\hat{\boldsymbol{\beta}}$ (using the t-distribution) with some measure of confidence that the true $\boldsymbol{\beta}$ lives within it.

 * Again, we do not say that the "true" $\boldsymbol{\beta}$ lives within such an interval, it lies there or not.  
 
 * Rather, we perform a procedure that over many sets of observations, and with respect to the precedure, we have guaranteed that the true value will lie in our interval with certain confidence.
 
========================================================

* Let us say (similarly to hypothesis testing) we wish to guarantee $\alpha=5\%$ significance.

* Our confidence interval will take the form of

$$\begin{align}
\large{\left( \hat{\boldsymbol{\beta}}_i - t_{n-p}^{\frac{\alpha}{2}} se(\hat{\boldsymbol{\beta}}_i),  \hat{\boldsymbol{\beta}}_i + t_{n-p}^{\frac{\alpha}{2}} se(\hat{\boldsymbol{\beta}}_i)\right)}
\end{align}$$

* Where we define $\large{t_{n-p}^{\frac{\alpha}{2}} }$ to be the <b>critical value</b> for which, 
  * if $t \sim T_{n-p}$,
  
  * the probability of 
  $$\begin{align} 
  t > t_{n-p}^{\alpha/2}
  \end{align}$$
  is less than $\frac{\alpha}{2}$; and
  
  * the probability of 
  $$\begin{align} 
  -t < - t_{n-p}^{\alpha/2}
  \end{align}$$ 
  is less than $\frac{\alpha}{2}$;
  
  * Or equivalently,
  $$\begin{align}
  P(\vert t \vert >  t_{n-p}^{\frac{\alpha}{2}}) < \alpha
  \end{align}$$

========================================================

* Suppose that we wish to compute a confidence interval on $\boldsymbol{\beta}_{Area}$, such that with $95\%$ confidence, we say the "true value" of $\boldsymbol{\beta}_{Area}$ lives within it.
  





```
Error in sumary(lmod) : could not find function "sumary"
```
